This approach outlines the steps needed to perform text analysis on a dataset using Python. The project aims to preprocess text data, analyze it, and derive meaningful insights. We'll use popular libraries like pandas, NLTK, and scikit-learn for text preprocessing, analysis.

Step 1: Define the Project Objectives

Objective: To perform text analysis on a given dataset.
Goals:
Clean and preprocess the text data.
Perform exploratory data analysis (EDA).
Calculate average number of words per sentence.
Extract and analyze key features like word frequency, sentiment, etc.
Visualize the results.

Step 2: Set Up the Environment
Libraries:
pandas: For data manipulation and analysis.
NLTK: For natural language processing.
re: For regular expressions
string: For string punctuation
NumPy: For creating array
BeautifulSoup: For getting better output data from website

Step 3: Load the Data
Load the dataset using pandas.

Step 4: Data Cleaning and Preprocessing
Tasks:
Remove punctuation, special characters, and numbers.
Convert text to lowercase.
convert text file to list of stopwords
Remove stopwords.
Tokenize the text.

Step 5: 
Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment Analysis was performed using lexical based approach.

Positive Score: This score is calculated by assigning the value of +1 for each word if found in the Positive Dictionary and then adding up all the values.

Negative Score: This score is calculated by assigning the value of -1 for each word if found in the Negative Dictionary and then adding up all the values. I multiply the score with -1 so that the score is a positive number.

Polarity Score: This is the score that determines if a given text is positive or negative in nature. It is calculated by using the formula: Polarity Score = (Positive Score – Negative Score)/ ((Positive Score + Negative Score) + 0.000001) Range is from -1 to +1

All the required dictionaries were created using - https://sraf.nd.edu/textual-analysis/resources/#LM%20Sentiment%20Word%20Lists

Analysis of Readability
Average sentence length, Fog index, complex word count and total word count were calculated. The following formulas were used -

Average Sentence Length = the number of words / the number of sentences

Percentage of Complex words = the number of complex words / the number of words where Complex words are words in the text that contain more than two syllables.

Fog Index = 0.4 * (Average Sentence Length + Percentage of Complex words)

Personal Pronouns
To calculate Personal Pronouns mentioned in the text, we use regex to find the counts of the words - “I,” “we,” “my,” “ours,” and “us”. Special care is taken so that the country name US is not included in the list.

Average Word Length
Average Word Length is calculated by the formula:
Sum of the total number of characters in each word/Total number of words

Syllable Count Per Word
We count the number of Syllables in each word of the text by counting the vowels present in each word. We also handle some exceptions like words ending with "es","ed" by not counting them as a syllable.

Complex Word Count
Complex words are words in the text that contain more than two syllables.

Word Count
We count the total cleaned words present in the text by 
1.	removing the stop words (using stopwords class of nltk package).
2.	removing any punctuations like ? ! , . from the word before counting.

Step 7:-
Calculate all scores and metrics required and save the file as output.xlsx.


